ENGLISH FAL SHORT STORIES GRADE 12
SHORT STORY 7
The fly
By Katherine Mansfield
About Katherine Mansfield (!888 – 1923 )
Katherine Mansfield was born in Wellington, New Zealand, in 1888. She was
educated in New Zealand and London. Apart from a short stay in new Zealand
from 1906 to 1908, she spent the rest of her life in Europe.
In 1915, during World War 1, she met up with her soldier brother,
Chummie. Shortly thereafter he died in the war, which left her shocked and
traumatized, and she sank into depression. Mansfield suffered from ill health
most of her life and travelled round Europe seeking treatment. She died of lung
complications in France in 1923.
Mansfield published her first piece of writing when she was nine. Although
she wanted to become a musician, she established herself as a writer instead.
Undaunted by the lack of success of her first volume, she persevered. When she
submitted a lightweight story to the editor of a magazine, he asked for something
‘darker’. It was this that set her on the path to becoming a Modernist writer,
avoiding positive, romantic topics and focusing instead on the ‘darker side of life.
She produced numerous novels of short stories, even some – regarded as her
best – shortly before her death, despite her ill-health. She is considered one of
the best short story writers of the period and had a major influence on the
development of the short story as a form of literature.
Background to The fly
The story takes place in an office in England some years after the First World
War (1914 – 1918) during which millions of young men lost their lives, many in
the brutal trench warfare that took place mainly in France and Flanders. Wilfred
Owen, a war poet, described the soldiers “dying like cattle”. You will see what he
meant if you get the chance to visit the enormous graveyards near the
battlefields, where there are rows upon rows of graves marked with a white
cross. This is a sobering sight and gives you some idea of the terrible slaughter
that took place. Imagine the effect these losses must have had on the families
and other loved ones of the dead men.
The Fly
“Y’are very snug in here.” Piped old Mr. Woodifield, and he peered out of
the great green-leather armchair by his friend the boss’s desk as a baby peers
out of it’s pram. His talk was over; it was time for him to be off. But he did not
want to go. Since he had retired, since his …stroke, the wife and the kids kept