International Journal of Advanced Educational Research
International Journal of Advanced Educational Research
ISSN: 2455-6157
Impact Factor: RJIF 5.12
www.educationjournal.org
Volume 3; Issue 1; January 2018; Page No. 05-10
Artificial intelligence and its scope in different areas with special reference to the field of education
Mudit Verma
Department of Education, Rama PG College, University of Lucknow, Chinhat, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India
Abstract
In the future, intelligent machines will replace or enhance human capabilities in many areas. Artificial intelligence is the
intelligence exhibited by machines or software. It is the subfield of computer science. Artificial intelligence is becoming a popular
field in computer science as it has enhanced the human life in many areas. Artificial intelligence in the last two decades has greatly
improved performance of the manufacturing, service sector and so in the field of education. Study in the field of artificial
intelligence has given rise to the rapidly growing technology known as expert system. Application areas of artificial intelligence is
heaving a huge impact on various fields of life as expert system is widely used in these days to solve the complex problems in
various areas as education, engineering, business, medicine, weather forecasting etc. The areas employing the technology of
artificial intelligence have seen an increase in the quality and efficiency. This paper gives an overview of this technology and the
scope of artificial intelligence in different areas with special reference to the use of this technology in the field of education along
with its meaning, searching techniques, inventions and future.
Keywords: artificial intelligence (AI), artificial neurons (neural computer networks), expert system, heuristic, searching techniques
1. Introduction perception, reasoning and action. It makes machines smarter
It is claimed that artificial intelligence is playing an increasing and more useful. It works with the help of artificial neurons
role in the research of educational technology, management (artificial neural network) and scientific theorems (if then
sciences and operational research areas. Intelligence is statements and logics). AI technologies have matured to the
commonly considered as the ability to collect knowledge to point in offering real practical benefits in many of their
solve complex problems. In the near future intelligent applications. Major artificial intelligence areas are Expert
machines will replace human capabilities in many areas. systems, Intelligent computer aided instructions, Natural
Artificial intelligence is the study of intelligent machines and language processing, Speech understanding, Robotics and
software that can reason, learn, gather knowledge, sensory systems, Computer vision and scene recognition,
communicate, manipulate and perceive the objects. John Neural computing. From these expert system is a rapidly
McCarthy coined the term in 1956 as branch of computer growing technology which is heaving a huge impact on
science concerned with making computers behave like humans. various field of life. The various techniques applied in
It is the study of the computation that makes it possible to artificial intelligence are Neural network, Fuzzy logic,
perceive reason and act. Artificial intelligence is different Evolutionary computing, Computer aided instructions and
from Psychology because it emphasis on computation and is Hybrid artificial intelligence.
different from computer science because of its emphasis on
Fig 1: Papers published on different AI techniques quarterly.
5